Class	Descriptions	Notes
Knight	"The Knight class is the workhorse fighting class.  Knights start with the largest selection of weapons and armor, and may ultimately use any type of weapon or armor, having the greatest melee damage potential of any class.  Being the toughest warriors of the classes, Knights begin with the greatest number of hit points and get the most number of hit points when they advance in level.  Knights may never learn spells, nor may they ever learn (or need) the Meditation skill."	Knight
Cavalier	"The Cavalier class is the first promotion of the Knight.  Cavaliers may advance to Master in several skills, and are allowed to purchase a warhorse from stables.  They can be further promoted to Champions, famed for their inspiring leadership, or to Black Knights, who fight in less scrupulous ways."	Knight
Champion	"The Champion class is the second and last promotion of knights who follow the path of Light.  Champions can grandmaster in the Plate, Shield, Sword, Spear, Armsmaster, Body Building, and Repair skills.  They are also proficient at battlefiled tactics, and under their leadership the entire party can attack and defend more effectively."	Knight
Black Knight	"The Black Knight is the second and last promotion of Knights who follow the path of Darkness.  Black Knights may grandmaster in the Plate, Shield, Sword, Spear, Armsmaster, Body Building, and Repair skills.  They also can occasionally Curse enemies they attack in melee, and dabble in thief skills."	Knight
Thief	"The Thief class concentrates less on fighting and more on utility skills, such as disarming traps and stealing.  Although they aren’t as good with weapons and armor as Knights, Thieves are still better fighters than the semi and full spell using classes.  Thieves may eventually use some Fire and Air spells, but they will never be very good at them."	Thief
Rogue	"The Rogue class is the first promotion from Thief.  Rogues can advance to Master in many skills, and also gain the ability to cast spells along with a small magic energy pool.  They can be further promoted to Spies, who focus on information gathering, or to more offensively-minded Assassins."	Thief
Spy	"The Spy class is the final promotion for thieves following the path of Light.  Spies can advance Air magic to Master and can grandmaster in Leather, Dagger, Ancient Weapon, Disarm Traps, Steal, Identify Item, and Perception."	Thief
Assassin	"The Assassin class is the final promotion for thieves following the path of Darkness.  Assassins can advance Fire magic to Master and can grandmaster in Leather, Dagger, Ancient Weapon, Disarm Traps, Steal, Identify Item, and Alchemy."	Thief
Monk	"Monks concentrate on unarmed combat.  Monks are second only to Knights in combat, and they have access to spells from the Spirit and Body schools of magic when they are promoted to Initiate."	Monk
Initiate	"Initiate is the first promotion of the Monk class.  Initiates can advance to Master in a number of skills.  They also gain the ability to cast spells from the Clerical schools of magic, and a small magic energy pool to go with it.  Initiates can be further promoted to the more magically apt Masters, or to Ninjas, who are talented at thieving skills."	Monk
Master	"Master is the final promotion for Monks following the path of Light. They can become masters in their magical skills.  Masters may grandmaster in Dodge, Leather, Unarmed combat, Staff, Learning, and Body Building."	Monk
Ninja 	"Ninja is the final promotion for Monks following the path of Darkness. Ninjas may grandmaster in Dodge, Leather, Unarmed combat, Staff, Learning, and Body Building.  They can also advance their Steal and Disarm Traps skills."	Monk
Paladin	"A cross between Knight and Cleric, Paladins perform both roles well, but not as well as the more focused classes they borrow from.  Like Knights, Paladins can learn to use any type of weapon or armor, although they don’t have as many choices to begin with.  Paladins also begin with the Spirit realm of magic, and can also learn to use the Clerical Mind and Body realms, to a lesser extent.  Eventually they can either master the Light realm, or dabble in the Dark magic, but they may never learn any of the Elemental realms."	Paladin
Crusader	"Crusader is the first Paladin promotion.  Crusaders can advance to Master in several skills, including the Spirit magic, and are allowed to raise the other Clerical achools to Expert.  They can be further promoted to charismatic Heroes, whose mastery of Light magic is only second to Priests and Wizards, or to dastardly Villians, who are nevertheless slightly better in combat."	Paladin
Hero	"Hero is the second and last promotion for Paladins following the path of Light. Heroes may grandmaster in the Repair, Mace, Shield, Spirit, and Merchant skills.  They also gain the ability to learn spells from the realm of Light magic, and may advance this and other realms to Master."	Paladin
Villain	"Villain is the second and last promotion for Paladins following the path of Darkness.  Villains may grandmaster in the Repair, Mace, Shield, and Spirit skills.  They also can learn to Steal.  Finally, Villains gain the limited ability to learn spells from the realm of Dark magic, and can advance the other realms to Master."	Paladin
Archer	"Like Paladins, the Archer is a hybrid of the Knight and Sorcerer classes.  Archers may learn to use all weapons except the mace (specializing in the bow, of course), but they may never learn the shield or plate armor skills.  They are compensated with the ability to learn magic from the elemental schools, particularly Air.  The greater realms of Light and Dark can be learned on their second promotions, but they will never be very skilled in them."	Archer
Warrior Mage	"Warrior Mage is the first Archer promotion.  Warrior Mages can advance a number of skills to Master, including Air magic, and may also achieve expert ranking in other magical skills.  They can choose to be further promoted to Master Archers, who are better at Water magic, or to Snipers, who are more skilled at Fire."	Archer
Master Archer	"Master Archer is the second and last Archer promotion for Archers following the path of Light.  Master Archers may grandmaster in Chain armor, Bow, Ancient Weapon, Air, Water, and Perception.  Master Archers also gain the ability to learn spells from the realm of Light magic."	Archer
Sniper	"Sniper is the second and last Archer promotion for Archers following the path of Darkness.  Snipers may grandmaster in Chain armor, Bow, Ancient Weapon, Fire, Air, and Perception.  They also gain the ability to learn spells from the realm of Dark magic.  Finally, Snipers are perfect shots and never miss with a bow."	Archer
Ranger	"Rangers are a cross between Knights and Druids.  Of all the classes, Rangers may learn the broadest range of skills, but can master few of them.  They may eventually learn an eclectic mix of the Elemental and Clerical realms of magic (all but Air and Spirit), to varying levels of mastery.  Rangers may also learn to use most weapons, armor, and secondary skills, with only Plate and Mace beyond their reach."	Ranger
Hunter	"The Hunter is the first class promotion for the Ranger.  Hunters gain the ability to cast spells and may advance Earth magic to Master and their other realms to Expert.  They can also advance to Master in several other skills.  Hunters may be further promoted to Ranger Lords, who are better in combat, or to Bounty Hunters, who specialise in thieving skills."	Ranger
Ranger Lord	"Ranger Lord is the final promotion available to Rangers following the path of Light.  Ranger Lords may grandmaster in Axe, Chain, Earth, Body, Perception, and Identify Monster, and master Sword and Water."	Ranger
Bounty Hunter	"Bounty Hunter is the final promotion available to Rangers following the path of Darkness.  Bounty Hunters may grandmaster in Axe, Earth, Perception, and Identify Monster, and master Water, Mind, Body, Disarm Traps, and Steal."	Ranger
Cleric	"Clerics are adventuring, spell casting holy men.  A Cleric is a mediocre fighter but an excellent spell caster, with spells concentrating on healing and defensive themes.  Clerics and Sorcerers are the only two classes that can grandmaster in the Mirrored Path of the Light and the Dark, and learn the awesome spells these realms of magic offer.  They are, unfortunately, rather limited in their weapons, with mace, staff, and possibly a racial weapon being their only choices.  Defense is a little better, as they can wear (but not necessarily master) any kind of armor."	Cleric
Priest	"Priest is the first Cleric Promotion.  They can Master a number of skills, particularly they magic skills.  Priests can be further promoted to Priests of the Light, who are slightly better at melee combat, or to Priests of the Dark, who are more powerful spellcasters."	Cleric
Priest of the Light	"Priest of the Light is the second and last Cleric promotion for Clerics following the path of Light.  Priests of the Light can learn and grandmaster in spells from the realm of Light. They may also grandmaster in all of their other spell skills, as well as Mace and Merchant."	Cleric
Priest of the Dark	"Priest of the Dark is the second and last Cleric promotion for Clerics following the path of Darkness.  Priests of the Dark can learn and grandmaster in spells from the realm of Dark. They may also grandmaster in all of their other spell skills, as well as Merchant and Meditation."	Cleric
Druid	"Druids are a hybrid of the Sorcerer and Cleric classes.  They make poor fighters (better only than the lowly Sorcerer) and have relatively few hit points.  On the plus side, Druids can use almost any realm of magic, generally with a high ability, with only Light being closed to them.  They can only use the staff, dagger, mace, and a racial weapon, while wearing only leather, robes, and shield as armor."	Druid
Great Druid	"Great Druids are the first Druid promotion.  Great Druids can advance several skills to Master, including most of their spell skills.  They can later choose to be promoted to Arch Druids, who specialize in utility spells, or to Warlocks, who are more powerful offensively."	Druid
Arch Druid	"Arch Druids are the second and last Druid promotion for Druids following the path of Light.  Arch Druids may grandmaster in Air, Water, Body, Alchemy, Identify Monster, and Meditation skills."	Druid
Warlock	"Warlocks are the second and last Druid promotion for Druids following the path of Dark.  Warlocks are allowed to learn the Dark realm of magic, and may grandmaster in Earth, Mind, Alchemy, and Meditation skills. "	Druid
Sorcerer	"Students of the realm of Elemental magic, Sorcerers concentrate on offensive and utilitarian magic.  Sorcerers are downright rotten fighters barely able to learn to use the dagger, the staff, and their racial weapon effectively.  They are allowed to use only leather armor or robes, cannot use shield, and have the lowest hit points of all the classes.  With that aside, Sorcerers can wield mighty offensive spells and have access to the Mirrored Path of the Light and the Dark, from which come the best spells in the lands.  "	Sorcerer
Wizard	"Wizards are the first Sorcerer promotion.  Wizards can advance to Master in many skills, particularly their magic skills.  They can be further promoted to more well-studied Arch Mages, or to terrifying undead Liches."	Sorcerer
Arch Mage	"Arch Mages is the second and last Sorcerer promotion for Sorcerers following the path of Light.  Upon their promotions, Arch Mages gain full access to the realm of Light magic.  Arch Mages can grandmaster in all their spell skills, plus Ancient Weapon, Identify Item, and Learning."	Sorcerer
Lich	"Lich is the second and last Sorcerer promotion for Sorcerers following the path of Dark.  This status is achieved through a vile process wherein the Lich-to-be stores their organs in a magical jar that they must guard.  Upon their ""ascension"", Liches gain full access to the realm of Dark magic, as well as a number of immunities and a life-draining unarmed attack.  (They’re barely capable at unarmed combat, though.)  Liches can grandmaster in all their spell skills, plus Staff, Ancient Weapon and Meditation."	Sorcerer
