Skill	Description	Normal	Expert	Master	GrandMaster
Staff	A staff is a two-handed pole equally good on offense and defense.  Expert ranking in the staff will increase your armor class and master ranking will allow you to occasionally stun your opponents.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill and weapon bonus added to Armor Class	Chance to stun equal to skill	Staff usable with the Unarmed skill.
Sword	The sword skill covers most types of blades longer than a knife.  Expert swordsmen gain a quicker attack while master swordsmen may use any one-handed sword in their left hand and another weapon in their right.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill reduces recovery time	Permits use of sword in left hand	Skill and weapon bonus added to Armor Class
Dagger	"While daggers don’t do the kind of damage that a sword or an axe can deliver, they are very quick—sometimes letting you get two attacks for every one of your slower opponents'.  Expert dagger fighters can wield a dagger in their left hand while using another weapon in their right.  Master dagger fighters have a chance of doing a triple damage attack.  This skill also governs the usage of throwing knives."	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Permits use of dagger in left hand	Chance to cause triple damage equal to skill	Skill added to Attack Damage
Axe	"While rather slow on the attack, axes do a lot of damage when they hit.  Expert axe fighters gain a little more speed on their attacks while master axe fighters can deliver extra damage."	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill reduces recovery time (double effect)	Skill added to Attack Damage	Chance to halve the Armor Class of the target.
Spear	Spear covers all kinds of pole weapons with blades attached to the business end.  Spears are versatile and can be used one or two handed (they work better with two hands).	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to damage.	Ability to use a spear in one hand.	Skill and weapon bonus added to Armor Class
Bow	"Bow skill covers both bow and crossbow usage.  Expert archers gain a speed increase with their weapon, while master archers can fire two arrows with every attack."	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill reduces recovery time	Bow fires two arrows on every attack	Skill added to damage.
Mace	Mace skill covers all kinds of blunt trauma weapons ranging from batons to flails.  Expert mace swingers do extra damage with their weapons while master ranking gives a chance to stun opponents.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to Attack Damage	Chance to stun equal to skill	Chance to paralyze equal to skill.
Blaster	"A weapon from before the Silence, their making has long since been lost.  Expert and Master Blasters gain double and triple accuracy with these awesome weapons."	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Double effect of skill; ignore distance penalty	Triple effect; skill added to AC penetration	Chance to eradicate equal to half the skill
Shield	Shield skill directly improves a character’s armor class while a shield is employed.  Expert shield users will not be slowed by them, while master ranking allows protecting other party members.	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty eliminated	Chance to cover an ally equal to skill	Receive 25% less damage from physical attacks
Leather	"Leather armor is the lightest armor a character can wear.  While leather provides less protection than chain or plate armor, it also slows your character down the least.  Leather armor skill increases the protection offered by leather armor.  Expert ranking allows wearing leather without it slowing you down, and higher ranks add useful abilities."	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty eliminated	Chance to absorb a hostile spell equal to skill	Allows using the Dodging skill
Chain	"Chain armor is the medium armor type.  It provides more protection than leather and less than plate, but it also slows your character down more than leather.  Chain armor skill increases the protection offered by chain armor.  Expert and master ranking both reduce the amount the armor slows you down."	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty halved	Recovery penalty eliminated	Receive 2/3 damage from physical attacks.
Plate	"Plate armor is the heaviest armor type.  It provides the most protection, but it slows your character down more than leather or chain.  Plate armor skill increases the protection offered by plate armor.  Only Grand Masters can wear plate without slowing down."	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty halved	Receive 1/2 damage from physical attacks.	Recovery penalty eliminated
Fire	Fire magic is a good source of offensive spells and includes spells having to do with speed.  Advancing in rank permits learning new fire spells and enhances those already known.	Torch, Fire Bolt, Fire Resistance and Fire Aura spells	Haste, Fireball and Fire Spike spells	Immolation, Meteor Shower and Inferno spells	Incinerate spell
Air	Air magic tends to be defensive and informational in nature and includes spells having to do with flight.  Advancing in rank permits learning new air spells and enhances those already known.	Wizard Eye, Feather Fall, Shock Resistance and Sparks spells	Jump, Shield and Lightning Bolt spells	Invisibility, Implosion and Fly spells	Starburst spell
Water	Water magic is equally defensive and offensive and concentrates on spells that move or change things.  Advancing in rank permits learning new water spells and enhances those already known.	Awaken, Poison Spray, Cold Resistance and Ice Bolt spells	Water Walk, Recharge Item and Acid Burst spells	Enchant Item, Town Portal and Ice Blast spells	Lloyd's Beacon spell
Earth	"Earth magic is defensive and includes spells that protect, bind, and strengthen.  Advancing in rank permits learning new earth spells and enhances those already known."	Stun, Slow, Magic Resistance and Deadly Swarm spells	Stone Skin, Blades and Stone to Flesh spells	Rock Blast, Telekinesis and Death Blossom spells	Mass Distortion spell
Spirit	"Spirit magic concentrates on spells involving life and death.  Included are spells to raise the dead, spells that affect the Undead, and spells that influence combat prowess.  Advancing in rank permits learning new spirit spells and enhances those already known."	Detect Life, Bless, Spectral Weapon and Turn Undead spells	Remove Curse, Preservation and Heroism spells	Spirit Lash, Raise Dead and Shared Life spells	Resurrection spell
Mind	"Mind magic tends to be offensive and informational in nature.  Charm, fear, and telepathy are all examples of mind magic.  Advancing in rank permits learning new mind spells and enhances those already known."	Remove Fear, Mind Blast, Mind Resistance and Aura of Conflict spells	Charm, Cure Paralysis and Berserk spells	Mass Fear, Cure Insanity and Psychic Shock spells	Enslave spell
Body	"Body magic is concerned with spells of healing and enhancement.  Spells to heal, wound, and cure disease and poison are all part of body magic.  Advancing in rank permits learning new body spells and enhances those already known."	Cure Weakness, Heal, Poison Resistance and Harm spells	Regeneration, Cure Poison and Hammerhands spells	Cure Disease, Immutability and Flying Fist spells	Power Cure spell
Light	"Light magic spells represent some of the strongest spells in Erathia.  Fully usable only by Clerics and Sorcerers, light magic cannot be chosen before creating your characters; rather, light magic must be learned and mastered during your travels."	Light Bolt, Destroy Undead, Dispel Magic and Paralyze spells	Summon Elemental, Day of the Gods and Prismatic Light spells	Day of Protection, Hour of Power and Sunray spells	Divine Intervention spell
Dark	"Dark magic spells are the strongest spells in Erathia.  While casting spells of darkness can have spectacular results, dark spells sometimes come with unwanted side effects…  Dark magic cannot be chosen before creating your characters, and is mostly restricted to Clerics and Sorcerers."	Reanimate, Toxic Cloud, Vampiric Weapon and Shrinking Ray spells	Shrapmetal, Control Undead and Pain Reflection spells	Sacrifice, Dragon Breath and Armageddon spells	Souldrinker spell
Identify Item	The identify skill will automatically identify an item if your character’s skill level is high enough when you right click on an item.  Certain items require your character to be an expert or master in this skill to properly identify them.	Ability to identify items	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Merchant	"Merchant skill helps adjust prices in your favor, whether you are buying or selling."	Skill adjusts shop prices in your favor	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Buy and sell items at cost.
Repair	Repair skill allows your characters to repair broken equipment.  Higher skill level allows you to repair better items and expert and master skill rankings allow you to repair complex items and artifacts.  The skill will work automatically when you right click on a broken item in your inventory.	Ability to repair items	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Bodybuilding	"Bodybuilding skill adds hit points directly to your character’s hit point totals.  Multiply the skill in bodybuilding by the character’s base class bonus (5 for knights, 2 for clerics, etc.), then add 5% for each character level past 20 to get the total.  Expert ranking doubles this total and master triples it."	Skill adds to Hit Points	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Regenerate hit points over time
Meditation	"Meditation skill adds spell points directly to your character’s spell point totals.  Multiply the skill in meditation by the character’s base class bonus (3 for sorcerers, 1 for paladins, etc.), then add 5% for each character level past 20 to get the total.  Expert ranking doubles this total and master triples it."	Skill adds to Spell Points	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Regenerate spell points over time
Perception	Perception increases your chance of noticing a trap as it goes off and reducing or avoiding the damage it would cause.  Perception also allows your character to notice treasures where others would not, both in dungeon layout and on slain enemies.  Higher perception skill allows you to escape stronger traps and notice more treasure.	Skill increases chance to avoid traps and notice treasures	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
Diplomacy	"Diplomacy helps to soften the impact of begging, bribing, or threatening someone to get them to cooperate with you.  The higher the skill, the less your reputation will suffer when you take any of those actions.  Expert and master ranking will double and triple the effects of diplomacy."	"Skill reduces reputation cost of begging, bribing, or threatening."	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Grandmaster text here
Thievery	Not Used	Normal Text goes here	Expert Text goes here	Master Text goes here	Grandmaster text here
Disarm Traps	Disarm traps skill is checked automatically when opening a trapped chest or other container.  A higher skill in disarm traps gives a better chance of disarming the trap.  Expert and Master rank doubles and triples the chance to successfully disarm the trap.	Skill increases chance to disarm traps on chests	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Dodging	Dodging skill can be used only when you are not wearing armor or using a shield.  Additional ranks of dodging will increase your armor class while not wearing armor.	Skill added to Armor Class	Skill added to Armor Class (double effect)	Skill added to Armor Class (triple effect)	Chance to evade an incoming attack equal to skill
Unarmed	"Unarmed skill is your ability to use only your hands and feet in combat, no weapons.  This skill only works with your hands empty.  Additional ranks of unarmed skill will increase your chance to hit."	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to damage.	Skill added to Attack Bonus and damage (double effect)	Chance to instantly kill equal to half the skill
Identify Monster	Identify Monster allows you to gain more information from creatures when you right click on them.  Initially you will learn their exact number of hit points if your skill is sufficient.  You can gain additional information at Expert and Master ranks.  Successfully identifying a monster also grants a small combat advantage against it.	Learn Hit Points and Armor Class of monster	Learn Attack type and damage of monster	Learn which spells the monster can cast.	Learn the monster's resistances
Armsmaster	"Armsmaster skill represents the warrior's tricks of the trade.  Initially, armsmaster reduces the recovery times of your melee weapons, and later on can give you a bonus to hit and even damage."	Skill reduces the recovery time of all melee weapons	Skill added to Attack Bonus of all melee weapons	Skill added to damage of all melee weapons	Double all the previous bonuses
Thievery	"Thievery represents your character’s ability to divert attention and do something unnoticed.  In practice this skill allows you to steal items from shops and people, and also to perform backstabs.  A succesful backstab doubles the damage dealt in melee, but an unsuccesful theft can lead to legal problems and reputation loss."	Skill gives chance to backstab and steal	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
Alchemy	"Alchemy skill allows you to mix potions.  Without the alchemy skill, any two potions you mix can always explode, though alchemy skill is added to the strength value of the base ingredient to determine the strength of a simple potion.  As you attain Expert, Master, and Grandmaster ranking in alchemy, you learn to mix more complicated potions without the risk of explosion."	Allows safe mixing of simple potions to make complex potions	Allows safe mixing of complex potions to make compound potions	Allows safe mixing of compound potions to make white potions	Allows safe mixing of white potions to make black potions
Learning	"Learning skill directly increases the experience your character receives.  Every point of skill is a percent of awarded experience that is given as a bonus (plus a starting bonus of 9%).  Five skill points would turn a 100 experience point award into a 114 experience point award.  Expert doubles and master triples this bonus, so 7 points of learning at master rank would give a 30% bonus to all experience point gain."	Skill increases amount of experience received	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
