										
#	Lvl	Fire Spells	Res	Short Name	Spell Description	Normal	Expert	Master	Grand Master	Stats
1	1	Torch Light	none	Torch Light	Torch light increases the radius of light surrounding your party in the dark.  	Duration 1 hour per point of  skill	Brighter light	Even brighter light	Brightest light	P
2	2	Fire Bolt	Fire	Fire Bolt	"Launches a burst of fire at a single target.  Damage is 1-3 points of damage per point of skill in Fire Magic, but casting cost is low.  Firebolt is safe and effective—the “Old Reliable” of the Sorcerer’s arsenal."	Slow rate of recovery	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
3	3	Fire Resistance	none	Prot Fire	Increases all your characters’ resistance to fire by an amount equal to your skill in Fire and lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
4	4	Fire Aura	none	Fire Aura	"Causes a single weapon to burn with a magical fire, giving the weapon the 'of fire' ability.  This spell lasts for one hour per point of skill in Fire Magic."	Of Fire	Of Flame	Of Infernoes	Can enchant permanently	P
5	5	Haste	none	Haste	Reduces the time it takes to recover from casting a spell or attacking with a weapon.  Characters will become weak after this spell wears off.  This spell affects the entire party at once.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 1 minute per skill point	Duration 1 hour + 3 minutes per skill point	Duration 1 hour + 4 minutes per skill point	PM
6	6	Fireball	Fire	Fireball	"Another Sorcerer’s favorite, fireball targets a single monster, but explodes to hurt anyone else caught in the blast.  If your party is too close to the blast, they will be hurt as well.  Fireball does 1-6 points of damage per point of skill in Fire Magic."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
7	7	Fire Spike	Fire	Fire Spike	Drops a Fire Spike on the ground that waits for a creature to get near it before exploding.  Fire Spikes last until you leave the map or they are triggered.	n/a	"Causes 1-6 points of damage per point of skill, 5 spikes maximum"	"Causes 1-8 points of damage per point of skill, 7 spikes maximum"	"Causes 1-10 points of damage per point of skill, 9 spikes maximum"	PC
8	8	Immolation	Fire	Immolation	Surrounds your characters with a very hot fire that is only harmful to others.  The spell will deliver 1-6 points of damage per point of skill to all nearby monsters for as long as they remain in the area of effect.  This spell can be cancelled early by Ctrl-clicking on its spellbook icon. 	n/a	n/a	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 15 minutes per point of skill	PC
9	9	Meteor Shower	Fire	Meteor Shwr	Summons flaming rocks from the sky in a large radius surrounding your chosen target.  Try not to be near the victim when you use this spell.  A single meteor does 8 points of damage plus 1 per point of skill in Fire Magic.  This spell only works outdoors.	n/a	n/a	Moderate rate of recovery and 10 meteors	Fast rate of recovery and 20 rocks	PMEC
10	10	Inferno	Fire	Inferno	"Inferno burns all monsters in sight when cast, excluding your characters.  Good for cleaning out rooms full of weak or moderate strength monsters in one or two easy castings.  Each monster takes 12 points of damage plus 1-2 per point of skill in Fire Magic.  This spell only works indoors."	n/a	n/a	Moderate rate of recovery	Fast rate of recovery	PC
11	11	Incinerate	Fire	Incinerate	"Amongst the strongest direct damage spells available, Incinerate inflicts massive damage on a single enemy.  It has a 3% chance per point of Fire Magic skill of instantly killing its target.  Even if the monster resists, it still suffers 15 points of damage plus 1-15 per point of skill in Fire Magic."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PMC
	Lvl	Air Spells	Res		Spell Description					
12	1	Wizard Eye	none	Wizard Eye	Wizard Eye causes the automap located in the upper right corner of the main gaming screen to show the locations of monsters and other points of interest while outdoors.  The spell lasts 1 hour per point of skill in Air Magic.	Only shows terrain and monsters	Shows treasure	Shows 'points of interest'	Spell never expires	P
13	2	Feather Fall	none	Feather Fall	Feather Fall prevents your characters from being hurt when falling more than ten feet by slowing the speed of the fall.  Feather Fall affects your entire party with one casting and has a duration based on your skill in Air Magic. 	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Increased jump height	P
14	3	Shock Resistance	none	Shock Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to electricity by an amount equal to your skill in Air and lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
15	4	Sparks	Elec	Sparks	"Sparks fires small balls of lightning into the world that bounce around until they hit something or dissipate.  It is hard to tell where they will go, so this spell is best used in a room crowded with small monsters.  Each spark does 2 points plus 1 per point of skill in Air Magic."	"3 sparks for 4 SP"	"5 sparks for 5 SP"	"7 sparks for 6 SP"	"9 sparks for 7 SP"	PMEC
16	5	Jump	none	Jump	"Jump launches your party up in the air, landing you 60 feet from where you started.  Your party takes no falling damage from the jump."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	P
17	6	Shield	none	Shield	Halves damage from incoming ranged attacks (such as rocks and arrows) by slowing the missiles down just before they hit.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
18	7	Lightning Bolt	Elec	Lightning	"Sorcerer’s Darling, Lightning Bolt discharges electricity from the caster’s hand to a single target.  It always hits and does 1-8 points of damage per point of skill in Air Magic."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
19	8	Invisibility	none	Invisibility	"This spell can't be cast while hostile monsters are nearby.  Invisibility works on the minds of nearby creatures, making them unable to notice the party unless spoken to or attacked.  Any sort of attack, regardless of whether or not it hits or misses, will break this spell."	n/a	n/a	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 15 minutes per point of skill	P
20	9	Implosion	Phys	Implosion	"Implosion is a nasty spell that affects a single target by destroying the air around it, causing a sudden inrush from the surrounding air, a thunderclap, and 10 points plus 1-10 points of damage per point of skill in Air Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Fast recovery rate	PMC
21	10	Fly	none	Fly	"Grants the power of flight to your characters!  This spell is very expensive and only works outdoors, but it is very useful.  Fly will drain one spell point every five minutes it is in use (I.E. when you aren't touching the ground)."	n/a	n/a	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	P
22	11	Starburst	Elec	Starburst	"Calls stars from the heavens to smite and burn your enemies.  Twenty stars are called, and the damage for each star is 20 points plus 1 per point of skill in Air Magic, and Starburst only works outdoors.  Try not to get caught in the blast…"	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PEC
	Lvl	Water Spells	Res		Spell Description					
23	1	Awaken	none	Awaken	"Automatically awakens all of your characters from a normal sleep and will awaken them from a magical sleep if they haven't had the sleep condition for too long.  The greater your skill in Water Magic, the longer the sleep condition could have been present before this spell becomes ineffective."	Works if asleep less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if asleep less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if asleep less than 1 day per point of skill	Fast recovery rate	P
24	2	Poison Spray	Pois	Poison Spr	"Sprays poison at monsters directly in front of your characters.  Damage is low, but most living monsters are vulnerable to poison, so it usually works.  Each shot does 2 points of damage plus 1-2 per point of skill in Water Magic."	"1 shot for 2 SP"	"3 shots for 4 SP"	"5 shots for 6 SP"	"7 shots for 8 SP"	P
25	3	Cold Resistance	none	Cold Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to cold by an amount equal to your skill in Water and lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
26	4	Ice Bolt	Cold	Ice Bolt	Fires a single bolt of ice at a single target.  It always hits and does 1-4 points of damage per point of skill in Water Magic.	Slow rate of recovery	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
27	5	Water Walk	none	Water Walk	"Water Walk lets your characters walk along the surface of water without sinking.  This spell can be very useful, but constantly drains one spell point every 20 minutes while in contact with water."	n/a	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Allows walking on lava	P
28	6	Recharge Item	none	Recharge	"Recharges any magic item that uses charges.  Every time this spell is cast, the item permanently loses 50% - 1 per point of skill in Water magic of its spent charges. "	n/a	Item loses 50% - 1 per point of skill in water magic	Item loses 30% - 1 per point of skill in water magic	Item loses 20% - 1 per point of skill in water magic	PE
29	7	Acid Burst	Pois	Acid Burst	Acid burst squirts a jet of extremely caustic acid at a single victim.  It always hits and does 9 points of damage plus 1-9 per point of skill.  	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMC
30	8	Enchant Item	none	Enchant Item	Imbues a normal item with magical powers.  The spell will fail if the item is too low-quality, but higher skill in Water Magic allows enchanting cheaper items.  Grandmasters can manage better enchantments.  This spell is more powerful at noon.	n/a	n/a	Moderate strength enchantments	Strong enchantments	P
31	9	Town Portal	none	Town Portal	"Town Portal teleports the party to the central fountain of a town the player has visited.  If hostile monsters are nearby, Town Portal only has a 5% chance per point of Water Magic skill of working when cast, otherwise it will always succeed."	n/a	n/a	Teleports to the last visited town	Can choose any visited town	P
32	10	Ice Blast	Cold	Ice Blast	"Fires a ball of ice in the direction the caster is facing.  The ball will shatter when it hits something, launching 7 shards of ice in all directions except the caster’s.  The shards will ricochet until they strike a creature or melt.  Each shard does 12 points of damage plus 1-6 per point of skill in Water Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMEC
33	11	Lloyd's Beacon	none	Lloyd's	Lloyd’s Beacon lets you place a marker at a location you want to teleport back to in the future.  These beacons will decay after 2 days per point of skill in Water magic after they are cast.  You can only return to your beacons once per day per 3 points of skill in Water Magic, but placing markers has no limit.  Teleportation via this spell also destabilizes the party's mana flow for a while, which makes restoring magic in guilds harder.	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Earth Spells	Res		Spell Description					
34	1	Stun	Magic	Stun	"Slaps a monster with magical force, forcing it to recover from the stun spell before it can do anything else.  Stun also knocks monsters back a little, giving you a chance to get away while the getting is good.  The success chance of this spell increases with your skill in Earth Magic."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Even faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PC
35	2	Slow	Magic	Slow	"Halves the walking speed and doubles the recovery rate of a single monster.  Slow makes sure a monster will attack you half as often, and will have a harder time catching up to you if you choose to run.  The success chance of this spell increases with your skill in Earth Magic."	Duration 5 minutes	Duration 20 minutes	Monster slows to 1/4 speed	Monster slows to 1/8 speed	PC
36	3	Magic Resistance	none	Magic Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to non-elemental magic by an amount equal to your skill in Earth and lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
37	4	Deadly Swarm	Phys	Swarm	"Summons a swarm of biting, stinging insects to bedevil a single target.  The swarm only does 5 points of damage plus 1-3 per point of skill in Earth Magic, but it never misses."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PC
38	5	Stone Skin	none	Stone Skin	Increases the armor class of all characters by 5 + 1 point per point of skill in Earth Magic.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
39	6	Blades	Phys	Blades	"Fires a rotating, razor-thin metal blade at a single monster.  The blade does 1-9 points of damage per point of skill in Earth Magic.  Unlike most damaging spells, there's a chance that the blade will miss its target."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PC
40	7	Stone to Flesh	none	Stone - Flesh	"Removes the stoned condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Earth Magic the longer the condition could have been present before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if stoned less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if stoned less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if stoned less than 1 day per point of skill	P
41	8	Rock Blast	Phys	Rock Blast	"Releases a magical stone into the world that will explode when it comes into contact with a creature or enough time passes.  The rock will bounce and roll until it finds a resting spot, so be careful not to be caught in the blast.  The explosion causes 1-8 points of damage per point of skill in Earth Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMC
42	9	Telekinesis	none	Telekinesis	"Telekinesis lets you manipulate an object at a distance.  Switches can be thrown, objects picked up, and doors opened with this spell, all from a nice safe distance from those nasty traps."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	P
43	10	Death Blossom	Phys	Death Blsm	"Fires a magical stone far into the air that creates a very large and powerful explosion, sending shards of explosive earth raining to the ground.  The damage is 20 points plus 1 per point of skill in Earth Magic for each shard.  This spell can only be used outdoors."	n/a	n/a	Moderate rate of recovery	"Faster recovery rate, double effect of skill"	PC
44	11	Mass Distortion	Magic	Mass Distort	"Increases the weight of a single target enormously for an instant, causing internal damage equal to 25% of the monster’s hit points plus another 2% per point of skill in Earth Magic.  The bigger they are, the harder they fall."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PMC
	Lvl	Spirit Spells	Res		Spell Description					
45	1	Detect Life	none	Detect Life	Allows the party to see an opponent's current health as an exact number.	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill.	Duration 30 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Shows spells	P
46	2	Bless	none	Bless	Blessed characters have an increased chance to hit monsters in hand to hand combat and with missiles.  A character’s bonus to hit is increased by 5 + 1 per point of skill in Spirit Magic.	Duration 1 hour plus 5 minutes per point of skill	Spell affects entire party	Duration 1 hour plus 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
47	3	Spectral Weapon	none	Spec Weap	"Partially shifts a weapon into the realm of spirits, allowing it to hit enemies immune to physical damage.  Enemies that are simply highly resistant to weapons will also be affected."	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	Can enchant permanently	PM
48	4	Turn Undead	Holy	Turn Undead	Deals damage equal to your Spirit Magic skill to all visible undead monsters.  Those that fail to completely resist the damage will also flee until the duration of Turn Undead runs out.	Duration 5 minutes	Duration 15 minutes	Duration 30 minutes	Duration 1 hour	PM
49	5	Remove Curse	none	Rmv. Curse	"Removes the cursed condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Spirit Magic the longer the condition could have been present before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if cursed than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if cursed less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if cursed less than 1 day per point of skill	P
50	6	Preservation	none	Preservation	"Preservation more tightly binds the soul to the body, providing some protection against instant death and eradication effects.  It also delays death due to massive hit point loss, although this will not stop a character from going unconscious.  If hit points are still too low when the spells wears off, such a wounded character will then die."	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Works on entire party	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	P
51	7	Heroism	none	Heroism	Heroism increases the damage a character does on a successful attack by 5 + 1 point per point of skill in Spirit Magic.  This spell affects the entire party at once.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
52	8	Spirit Lash	Magic	Spirit Lash	"This spell attempts to weaken the link between the body and soul, causing 10 + 1-8 points of damage per point of skill in Spirit Magic to all monsters near the caster."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate and larger radius of effect	PMC
53	9	Raise Dead	none	Raise Dead	"Raises a character from the dead if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Spirit Magic the longer the character could have been dead before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to raise the character short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple.  Casting this spell will leave your character in the weak condition."	n/a	n/a	Works if dead less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if dead less than 1 day per point of skill	P
54	10	Shared Life	none	Shared Life	"Shared Life combines the life force of your characters and redistributes it amongst them as evenly as possible.  All current hit points are totaled and 3 extra points per point of skill in Spirit Magic is added to this total.  Then the points are distributed back to the characters.  The resulting hit points can temporarily exceed their normal maximum."	n/a	n/a	Adds 3 hit points per point of skill to the pool	Adds 4 hit points per point of skill to the pool	P
55	11	Resurrection	none	Resurrection	"Resurrects a dead or eradicated (body destroyed) character.  Since this spell reconstitutes the body, it leaves the resurrected character in much better fighting condition than Raise Dead; moreover, it has no time limit.  The only downside of this spell is its very slow recovery rate."	n/a	n/a	n/a	Restores 30 hit points plus 15 per point of skill	P
	Lvl	Mind Spells	Res		Spell Description					
56	1	Remove Fear	none	Remove Fear	"Removes the afraid condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Mind Magic the longer the condition could have been present before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	Works if afraid less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if afraid less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if afraid less than 1 day per point of skill	Spell affects entire party	P
57	2	Mind Blast	Mind	Mind Blast	Fires a bolt of mental force damaging to a single targets’ nervous system.  Mind Blast does 3 points of damage plus 1-3 per point of skill in Mind Magic.	Slow recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMC
58	3	Mind Resistance	none	Mind Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to mental attacks by an amount equal to your skill in Mind and lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	PC
59	4	Aura of Conflict	none	Conf Aura	Turns one party member into a "hostility magnet", inciting all hostile monsters to attack him or her more often.  Conversely, the rest of the party will be paid less attention to.  This spell is best used on your sturdiest fighter, and its duration is 10 minutes per point of skill in Mind Magic.	Weak effect	Moderate effect	Strong effect	Strongest effect	P
60	5	Charm	Mind	Charm	"Calms a single targeted creature and removes any hostile feelings it has towards your characters.  If this creature takes any damage, it will immediately become hostile again.  The success chance of this spell increases with your skill in Mind Magic."	n/a	Duration 15 minutes	Duration 30 minutes	Unlimited duration	P
61	6	Cure Paralysis	none	Cure P-lyze	"Cures paralysis if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Mind Magic the longer the character could have been paralyzed before the ""point of no return"" is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if paralyzed less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if paralyzed less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if paralyzed less than 1 day per point of skill	PC
62	7	Berserk	Mind	Berserk	"Causes a single monster to go mad with battle lust, attacking the nearest living creature until the spell wears off.  The success chance increases with your skill in Mind Magic."	n/a	Duration 15 minutes	Duration 30 minutes	Duration 1 hour	PC
63	8	Mass Fear	Mind	Mass Fear	"All creatures in the caster’s sight fear the caster and flee.  If a creature takes damage while under the influence of this spell, the spell will be broken.  Mass Fear will not work on Undead creatures.  The success chance of this spell increases with your skill in Mind Magic."	n/a	n/a	Duration 15 minutes	Duration 30 minutes	PC
64	9	Cure Insanity	none	Cure Insane	"Cures insanity if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Mind Magic the longer the character could have been insane before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	n/a	Works if insane less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if insane less than 1 day per point of skill	P
65	10	Psychic Shock	Mind	Psy - Shock	"Similar to Mind Blast, Psychic Shock targets a single creature with mind damaging magic, only to a much greater effect.  Psychic Shock does 12 points of damage plus 1-12 per point of skill in Mind Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMC
66	11	Enslave	Mind	Enslave	"Takes control of target's mind for one hour.  Enslaved creatures will fight monsters that are hostile to the caster for the duration of the spell, and will not fight with the caster even if attacked by the caster or his friends.  This spell will not work on the Undead.  The success chance increases with your skill in Mind Magic."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Body Spells	Res		Spell Description					
67	1	Cure Weakness	none	Cure Weak	"Cures the weak condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Body Magic the longer the character could have been weak before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to cure the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	Works if weak less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if weak less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if weak less than 1 day per point of skill	Spell affects entire party	P
68	2	Heal	none	Heal	Cures hit points on a single target when cast.  The number cured is equal to five plus 2 per point of skill in Body Magic.	Cures 5 hit points plus 2 per point of skill	Cures 5 hit points plus 3 per point of skill.  Ranged casting ok.	Cures 5 hit points plus 4 per point of skill	Cures 5 hit points plus 5 per point of skill	P
69	3	Poison Resistance	none	Poison Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to poisons and acid by an amount equal to your skill in Body and lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
70	4	Harm	Magic	Harm	Directly inflicts magical damage upon a single creature.  Harm does 8 points of damage plus 1-2 per point of skill in Body Magic.	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
71	5	Regeneration	none	Regeneration	Gives the regeneration ability to a single character.  Regeneration will slowly heal back hit points over time while the spell is active.	n/a	"Slowly heals hit points over time, Duration 1 hour per point of skill"	Faster hit point recovery / minute	Fastest hit point recovery / minute	P
72	6	Cure Poison	none	Cure Poison	"Cures poison in a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Body Magic the longer the character could have been poisoned before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if poisoned less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if poisoned less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if poisoned less than 1 day per point of skill	P
73	7	Hammerhands	none	Hammerhand	"Hammerhands magically enhances the skill of an unarmed combatant, allowing his strikes to land more precisely against an opponent's weak spots.  Hammerhands adds magic damage equal to twice the caster's Body Magic skill to each unarmed attack.  It also affects regular melee attacks, but only at 25% efficiency."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Spell affects entire party	PM
74	8	Elixir of Life	none	Elixir	"Cures the diseased, drunk and zombie conditions from a character, and also restores 25 hit points plus 12 per point of skill in Body Magic.  The spell may fail to cure a condition if it was inflicted too long ago, compared to caster’s skill and rank in Body Magic.  In that case, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	n/a	Cures conditions inflicted less than 1 hour per point of skill	Cures conditions inflicted less than 1 day per point of skill	P
75	9	Immutability	none	Immutability	"Immutability affects the entire party at once, granting immunity to certain spells and monster abilities that cause debilitation conditions.  These are:  Poison, Disease, Stone, Paralyze, and Weak.  Every time this spell saves a character from an effect, it weakens.  The spell can survive 1 attack per point of skill in body magic--after that, Immutability is broken."	n/a	n/a	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Grants immunity to death and eradication effects	P
76	10	Flying Fist	Phys	Flying Fist	Flying Fist throws a heavy physical force at a single opponent that does 20 points of damage plus 1-10 per point of skill in Body Magic.	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMEC
77	11	Power Cure	none	Power Cure	Cures hit points of all characters in your party at once.  The number cured is equal to 10 plus 5 per point of skill in Body Magic.	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PM
	Lvl	Light Spells	Res		Spell Description					
78	1	Light Bolt	Ener	Light Bolt	Fires a bolt of light at a single target that does 1-4 points of damage per point of skill in light magic.  While the damage is modest, this spell ignores all known magical protections and immunities.	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PM
79	2	Destroy Undead	Holy	Dest Undead	"Calls upon the power of Heaven to undo the evil magic that extends the lives of the Undead, inflicting 16 points of damage plus 1-16 per point of skill in Light Magic upon a single, unlucky target.  This spell only works on the Undead."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	P
80	3	Dispel Magic	none	Dispel Magic	"Removes all spells on all creatures in the caster’s sight, both helpful and harmful.  Recovery is reduced by an amount equal to skill in Light Magic  ."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PM
81	6	Paralyze	Magic	Paralyze	"Paralyze temporarily prevents a monster from moving or attacking for the (short) duration of this spell.  However, every time the monster is damaged, the spell has a chance of wearing off prematurely, so it's best used defensively.  The success chance of this spell increases with your skill in Light Magic."	Duration 5 minutes	Faster recovery rate, duration 10 minutes	Faster recovery rate, duration 20 minutes	Fastest recovery rate, duration 30 minutes	PM
82	5	Summon Elemental	none	Summon	Summons a Lesser Light Elemental to fight for the party.  It will stay until the spell duration runs out or it is destroyed.  You can have no more than 1 elemental summoned at once.	n/a	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill.  1 elemental at one time	Summons a normal elemental.  Duration 15 minutes per point of skill. 3 elementals at once	Summons a greater elemental.  5 Elementals maximum.	PM
83	6	Day of the Gods	none	Day -o- Gods	Temporarily increases all seven stats on all your characters by ten points plus a multiple of your skill in Light magic.  This spell typically lasts until you rest.	n/a	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quadruple effect of skill	P
84	7	Prismatic Light	Magic	Pris Light	Inflicts 25 points of damage plus 1-3 per point of skill in Light Magic on all creatures in sight.  This spell can only be cast indoors.	n/a	Slow recovery rate	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PC
85	8	Day of Protection	none	Day -o- Prot	"Simultaneously casts Protection from Fire, Air, Water, Earth, Mind, and Body, plus Feather Fall and Wizard Eye on all your characters, with increased duration, using your skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	Triple duration	Quadruple duration	PMEC
86	9	Hour of Power	none	Hour -o- Pwr	"Simultaneously casts Haste, Heroism, Shield, Stone Skin, and Bless on all your characters, using your skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	All spells cast as Master	All spells cast as Grand Master	PMC
87	10	Sunray	Fire	Sunray	"Sun Ray is the second most devastating spell in the game, concentrating the fire of the sun on one unfortunate creature.  Since Sun Ray must focus the light of the sun, it cannot be cast at night or deep underground.  Sun Ray does 20 points of damage plus 1-20 per point of skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	Slow recovery rate	Moderate recovery rate	PC
88	11	Divine Intervention	none	Divine Inter	"Three times per day you may call upon the heavens to heal your characters of all damage, restore your spell points, and remove all adverse conditions.  The gods exact a price, however, aging the caster 10 years for each Divine Intervention.  Recovery from this spell is shortened with skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Dark Spells	Res		Spell Description					
89	1	Reanimate	none	Reanimate	"Reanimate allows you to raise a lifeless creature from the dead (sort of).  The zombie will fight against monsters hostile to the caster until it is killed (again) or until the party leaves the map.  The zombie will have 10 hit points per point of skill in dark magic, up to its normal maximum."	Creature gets 20 hit points per skill point (up to creature's maximum)	Creature gets 30 hit points per skill point	Creature gets 40 hit points per skill point	Creature gets 50 hit points per skill point	PM
90	2	Toxic Cloud	Pois	Toxic Cloud	A poisonous cloud of noxious gases is formed in front of the caster and moves slowly away from your characters.  The cloud does 25 points of damage plus 1-10 per point of skill in Dark Magic and lasts until something runs into it.	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
91	3	Vampiric Weapon	none	Vamp Weap	"Enchants a weapon with the Vampiric ability.  Damage inflicted on monsters struck by this weapon will be given to the weapon's wielder as extra hit points, possibly exceeding his normal hit point maximum."	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	Can enchant permanently	P
92	4	Shrinking Ray	Magic	Shrink Ray	"Shrinks even the grandest of monsters to more manageable sizes. Duration of this spell is 20 minutes.  The success chance increases with your skill in Dark Magic.  A shrunken monster deals one half, one third, or one quarter its normal damage while shrunk."	Reduces monster size to one half normal	Reduces monster size to one third normal	Reduces monster size to one fourth normal	Area Effect (Shrinks a group of monsters)	PC
93	5	Shrapmetal	Phys	Shrapmetal	"Fires a blast of hot, jagged metal in front of the caster, striking any creature that gets in the way.  Each piece inflicts 6 points of damage plus 1-6 per point of skill in Dark Magic."	n/a	Faster recovery rate and 5 fragments	Faster recovery rate and 7 fragments	Fastest recovery rate and 9 fragments	PMC
94	6	Control Undead	Holy	Cntrl Undead	"Takes control of an Undead target's mind.  Controlled Undead will fight monsters that are hostile to the caster for the duration of the spell, and will not fight with the caster even if attacked by the caster or his friends.  The success chance increases with your skill in Dark Magic."	n/a	Duration 15 minutes	"Faster recovery rate, duration 30 minutes"	"Fastest recovery rate, lasts indefinitely"	P
95	7	Pain Reflection	none	Pain Reflect	"When a monster hits a character with Pain Reflection active, the monster takes damage equal to what it inflicted in the character."	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Affects entire party	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	PM
96	8	Sacrifice	none	Sacrifice	"This evil spell immediately slays a single hireling, reducing the reputation of the party significantly.  The caster's spell points are completely returned, and all conditions, hit points, and magical aging are immediately healed."	n/a	n/a	Slow recovery rate	Moderate recovery rate	P
97	9	Dragon Breath	FirePois	Drag Breath	"Dragon Breath empowers the caster to exhale a cloud of toxic flames that target a single monster and damage all creatures nearby.  This spell is the most powerful damage spell in the land, doing 1-25 points of damage per point of skill in Dark Magic."	n/a	n/a	Slow recovery rate	Moderate recovery rate	PMEC
98	10	Armageddon	Magic	Armageddon	"This spell is the town killer.  It can only be cast outdoors.  Armageddon inflicts 50 points of damage plus 1 point of damage for every point of Dark skill your character has to every creature on the map, including all your characters."	n/a	n/a	Can only be cast three times per day	Can only be cast four times per day	PC
99	11	Souldrinker	Cold	Souldrinker	"This horrible spell bathes all creatures in sight in sepulchral cold, friend or enemy, sucking their life force.  Souldrinker then transfers that life to your party in much the same fashion as Shared Life.  Damage (and healing) is 25 + 1-8 per point of skill."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
