Stats Descriptions	Description
Might	"Might is the statistic that represents a character's overall strength, and the ability to put that strength where it counts.  Characters with a high might statistic do more damage in combat."
Intellect	"Intellect represents a character's ability to reason and understand complex, abstract concepts.  A high intellect contributes to Sorcerer, Archer, Ranger, Thief, and Druid spell points.  It also affects wand power."
Personality	"Personality represents both a character's strength of will and personal charm.  Clerics, Paladins, Rangers, Monks, and Druids depend on personality for their spell points.  It also affects merchant prices."
Endurance	Endurance is a measure of the physical toughness and durability of a character.  A high endurance gives a character more hit points.
Agility	Agility represents a character's dexterity and precision of movement.  A high agility will increase a character's armor class and allow the character to hit monsters more frequently in combat.
Speed	Speed is a measure of how quick a character is.  A high speed statistic will increase the rate with which the character recovers from attacks.
Luck	"Luck has a subtle influence throughout the game, but is most visible in the ability of a character to occasionally deal double-damage critical hits."
Hit Points	Hit points indicate how much damage your character can sustain before falling unconscious or dying.  A character is unconscious at zero hit points or less.  Hit points return after 8 hours of uninterrupted rest.  While some magical effects can increase a character's hit points above their normal maximum, the excess will quickly dissipate.
Armor Class	"Armor Class is a measure of how difficult it is for a monster to hit a character.  The higher the armor class, the better the chance of avoiding an attack."
Spell Points	Spell points are needed to cast spells.  Every spell has a spell point cost that is deducted from this statistic when it's cast.  Spell points return after 8 hours of uninterrupted rest.  While some magical effects can increase a character's spell points above their normal maximum, the excess will quickly dissipate.
Condition	"Condition shows the worst 'effect' your character is suffering, such as poisoned, diseased, or dead.  Many conditions seriously hurt your character's ability to fight, and should be cured as soon as possible."
Quick Spells	"The Quick Spells are the five spells that can be cast without opening the spell book, by pressing 'S7890' keys; the first one is also triggered by shift-clicking on a monster.  You can set a quick spell by opening your spell book ('C'), clicking on the spell you want to set, then clicking on one of the set spell buttons the bottom of the spell book.

Currently set quick spells:"
Age	"Age shows the current age of your character.  The first number is the temporary age number, and the second is your real age.  Certain monsters and magical effects can raise your temporary age above your real age."
Level	Level is a measure of the training your character has gone through.  A high level contributes to hit points and spell points.  A temporary level increase can also affect skill values.
Experience	"Experience is a simple indicator of your character's overall understanding of the world.  With enough experience points (and a little gold), you can train your characters in training grounds throughout the land to increase their level and gain skill points to spend on skills."
Attack Bonus	"Attack Bonus is the sum of all factors (skill, spells, Agility, etc.) that influence your character's chance to hit monsters with an equipped weapon."
Attack Damage	"Attack Damage is the sum of all factors (Might, spells, certain weapon skills at expert or master, etc.) that influence the damage your character does with an equipped weapon."
Shoot Bonus	"Shoot Bonus is the sum of all factors (skill, spells, Agility, etc.) that influence your character's chance to hit monsters with an equipped missile weapon."
Shoot Damage	"Shoot Damage is the sum of all factors (spells, weapon bonuses, etc.) that influence the damage your character does with an equipped missile weapon."
Fire	"Fire Resistance represents your character's ability to minimize damage from fire attacks.  Though a high resistance can greatly reduce fire damage, it does not make your character immune."
Shock	"Shock Resistance represents your character's ability to minimize damage from electricity attacks.  Though a high resistance can greatly reduce shock damage, it does not make your character immune."
Cold	"Cold Resistance represents your character's ability to minimize damage from cold attacks.  Though a high resistance can greatly reduce cold damage, it does not make your character immune."
Poison	"Poison Resistance represents your character's ability to minimize damage from poisons and acid.  Though a high resistance can greatly reduce poison damage, it does not make your character immune."
Mind	"Mind Resistance represents your character's ability to minimize damage from mental attacks.  Though a high resistance can greatly reduce mind damage, it does not make your character immune."
Magic	"Magic Resistance represents your character's ability to minimize damage from non-elemental magic.  Though a high resistance can greatly reduce magic damage, it does not make your character immune."
Skill Points	Skill points are awarded whenever your character trains for a new level.  You can spend skill points on your skills at any time.
