This is the new artifact spoiler for Elemental Mod, accurate as of v3.0.
The player is not expected to read it before playing, as discovery is part of
the fun.  However, you should consult this file if you're unsure precisely how
the artifact you've found works.

First of all, a total of 45 artifacts and relics exists in the mod, 16 of them
newly added.  (This does not include various 'special items' that show up at
predetermined places.)  In a single game, however, it's only possible to
collect a total of 20 artifacts, 12 of them as random drop from dragons and
other treasure level 6 generators (including some chests), and 8 more appearing
in specific chests scattered throughout the game -- these chests always contain
some kind of artifact or relic, but which one is usually random.  Unlike in
vanilla, waiting for respawn won't grant you more artifacts from such chests.

Here's the list of those artifact chests:
* four artifacts in the obelisk treasure;
* one artifact as part of Arcomage reward;
* one artifact in Clanker's Laboratory (just like in vanilla);
* one artifact in Colony Zod (also in vanilla);
* and one artifact in the Shoals.

Now I'll describe the 16 new artifacts in detail.

1. Dragon's Wrath (wand)
An artifact wand that shoots Dragon Breath.  It cannot be recharged by external
means, but instead regenerates one charge every 30 minutes on its own.  It has
a limit of 17 charges.  It behaves like any other wand otherwise.

2. Headache (axe)
A relic axe that deals extra Mind damage with a chance of inflicting Berserk,
but penalizes mental stats.  The Mind damage acts like any other elemental
damage bonus.  Berserk triggers on 20% of hits, and the power of the spell
depends on the wielder's Axe skill (acting instead of Mind Magic), including
duration and the bonus to resistance penetration (yes, it can be resisted).

3. Storm Trident (spear)
An artifact trident that deals extra Shock damage, grants water walking and
Shock immunity, and adds a 0 SP Lightning Bolt to the wielder's spellbook.
The added spell can be cast by anyone, even Knights, and uses Spear skill
instead of Air Magic for determining damage and recovery.  Note that there's no
way to cast "ordinary" Air-Magic-dependent LB while the trident is wielded.

4. Ellinger's Robe (robe)
An artifact robe that provides Preservation (as the spell) and unconditional
immunity to Weakness (even e.g. from Haste or lack of rest), and adds +2 to
every magic skill of the wearer.  This last bonus does stack with ordinary
magic-boosting items.  As a robe, it can be worn by anyone.  It's probably a
good idea to Harden it, otherwise its Preservation bonus would be unreliable.

5. Viper (staff)
An artifact staff with a speed bonus, extra Poison damage, and a 20% chance
to cast Slow on hit.  The spell uses the wielder's Staff skill to determine
duration, power, and resistance penetration.  This artifact is mostly intended
for Monks, who lacked a good artifact weapon in vanilla.

6. Temple in a Bottle (misc)
Previously an entrance to the credits dungeon, it's now actually useful!  The
bottle teleports the party to a small room with a temple and four chests, and
exiting it will return to whenever the artifact was used (and give back the
bottle).  It cannot be used before it's identified, and also in Arena.  Lloyd's
Beacon and Invisibility cannot be cast inside the bottle.  It can still be
found in Shoals, but may also appear randomly before that, in which case the
Shoals chest will contain another random artifact.

7. Sword of Light (sword)
A relic sword that attacks with Energy, adds +5 to Light Magic, and can only be
used by Good characters.  The magic bonus stacks with the ordinary "of Light
Magic" bonus.  Like with other aligned relics, it can be used by Light-promoted
PCs even if the party as a whole is on the Dark path.  If the sword is wielded
together with some other weapon, only 50% of the total melee damage is dealt as
Energy, and the rest depends on the other weapon.  While this relic is mainly
intended for Paladins, it's also a good fit for Goblin Sorcerers or Clerics.

8. Oghma Infinium (misc)
A relic book that can be consumed (after it's identified) for a 80 skill point
bonus, at the cost of 20 permanent age and 20 more temporary (curable) age.
For Liches in particular, it's purely beneficial, as they don't have age
penalties.  This relic will usually be found in obelisk treasure, unless it was
generated somewhere else before the party's first visit to Evenmorn Island.

9. Grim Reaper (poleaxe)
A relic poleaxe that has a 20% chance each hit to (attempt to) instantly kill
its target.  This costs 15 SP, or twice as much HP if the wielder is out of SP.
The relic also passively drains 1 SP per 5 minutes while enemies are nearby.
The target may resist the death effect, either through Magic resistance (the
wielder's Axe skill determines resistance penetration), or through HP (with a
chance equal to (monster's current HP) / (monster's total HP)).  On higher
difficulties, instant death also has a chance to fail unconditionally.

10. Witchbane (amulet)
A relic amulet that grants immunity to non-elemental Magic, but sets max SP to
zero.  This does not disallow spellcasting by itself, but any remaining SP will
gradually disappear as per the overheal mechanic.  For Knights and other
non-spellcasters, this item is purely beneficial, but even other classes can
use it tactically, as Magic immunity protects from most sources of instant
death, among other things.

11. Bag of Holding (misc)
An artifact pouch that can be used to open a 9x9 chest-like space.  Works much
like a porter hireling.  Note that if you sell or lose the bag, the items
inside are lost forever!  Cannot be used before it's identified.

12. Clover (mace)
An artifact mace that adds +50 to Luck and doubles the wielder's critical hit
chance (in melee).  Since a critical hit is essentially a damage multiplier,
this artifact gets more effective the higher your base damage (and Luck) is.

13. Flattener (mace)
A relic hammer with the Spectral property (attacks with either Physical or
Magic element, whichever is more beneficial) that also has a 10% chance to
cast Mass Distortion on hit, but requires two hands to wield.  It CAN be used
in one hand, but this will penalize melee recovery by 20 points.  Mass
Distortion uses the wielder's Mace skill for determining damage, and like the
weapon itself, may use either Physical or Magic element, dep. on the monster.

14. Eloquence Talisman (amulet)
A relic amulet that lowers the recovery of all cast spells by 25% and also adds
+5 to Merchant skill, but drains 1 SP every 5 minutes.  The recovery bonus
essentially increases the caster's DPS (but also SP expenses) by a third.

15. Gadgeteer's Belt (belt)
An artifact belt that improves magical consumables: both scrolls and wands are
cast at GM and get +5 to spell power, and most potions (EXCEPT black) also get
+25% to base power when used.  Thieves get double benefits from this artifact
(+10 and +50% respectively).

16. Gardener's Gloves (gauntlets)
Artifact gloves that improve Earth Magic (the usual +50% bonus to skill), but
also allow any monster to drop a reagent on death.  The monster must be damaged
by the artifact's wearer at least once (melee, ranged, or magic; Armageddon
does NOT count), and the chance to drop a reagent is 5%, or 15% if the wearer
is a Ranger or a Druid.  Reagent's power depends on the late monster's level,
but the color is random.  70+ level monsters can drop the most powerful
reagents.  Monsters that already can drop a reagent (e.g. trolls) are
unaffected by this artifact.  And like with those "natural" reagents,
reanimated monsters never drop reagents from this artifact either.
